Block examples documentation (#6560)
plone/volto: docs/source/blocks/examples/customviewvariationsandschemaenhancer.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description": "Volto block with custom schema and view components using variations and a schema enhancer in one of the variations"
    "property=og:description": "Volto block with custom schema and view components using variations and a schema enhancer in one of the variations"
    "property=og:title": "Volto block with custom schema, variations and schema enhancer"
    "keywords": "Volto, React, blocks, grid, container, Plone"
---

(custom-schema-view-variations-schema-enhancer)=

# Block with a custom schema, variations and a schema enhancer in a variation.

We can create a block that uses `variations`. A {term}`variation` is an alternative view of a block. This variation is shown as an additional option in the schema editor and lets the webmaster to change how this block is viewed. Think of it as a different view of the same block.

> A {term}`schema enhancer` is an option of a variation. Using this schema enhancer, the block schema can be extended to have additional fields.

Reviewer: We need to add this term to the `plone/documentation` `glossary.md`.

```markdown
schema enhancer
    A schema enhancer uses the `schemaEnhancer` function, which can modify the schema used by the `InlineForm` component.
    Any registered extension plugin can provide a `schemaEnhancer` function.
    This function receives an object with `formData`, which is the block data; `schema`, which is the original schema to modify; and the injected `intl`, which aids with internationalization.
```

```suggestion
A {term}`schema enhancer` is an option of a variation.
Using this schema enhancer, you can extend the block schema to have additional fields.
```

> What we need to do is to define the schema, the view component, the variations, the schema enhancer and configure the block settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, define the schema, view component, variations, and schema enhancer, then configure the block settings.
```

## Preparations

> In your volto addon, create a folder inside the {file}`components` folder to save all the files required to create a block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your Volto add-on, create a subfolder {file}`ExampleBlock06` inside the {file}`components` folder to save all the files required to create a block.
```

> Name this folder as {file}`ExampleBlock06`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Schema

> Create a {file}`Schema.js` file inside the {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder, with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a {file}`Schema.js` file inside the {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder, with the following contents.
```

```js
import messages from './messages';

const Schema = ({ intl }) => {
  return {
    title: intl.formatMessage(messages.block06),
    block: 'block06',
    fieldsets: [
      {
        id: 'default',
        title: intl.formatMessage(messages.default),
        fields: ['url', 'title'],
      },
    ],

    properties: {
      url: {
        title: intl.formatMessage(messages.URL),
        widget: 'url',
      },
      title: {
        title: intl.formatMessage(messages.title),
      },
    },
    required: [],
  };
};

export default Schema;
```

## Messages

> As you have noted, we have prepared the block to be internationalized, {term}`internanationalization` (i18n), is the process of creating user interfaces which are suitable for different languages and cultural contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you may have noted, you prepared the block for internationalization.
{term}`Internationalization` (i18n) is the process of creating user interfaces which are suitable for different languages and cultural contexts.
```

> So we need a file {file}`messages.js` in the same {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a file {file}`messages.js` in the same {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder with the following contents.
```

```js
import { defineMessages } from 'react-intl';

const messages = defineMessages({
  block06: {
    id: 'block06',
    defaultMessage: 'Block 06',
  },
  default: {
    id: 'default',
    defaultMessage: 'Default',
  },
  URL: {
    id: 'URL',
    defaultMessage: 'URL',
  },
  title: {
    id: 'title',
    defaultMessage: 'Title',
  },
});

export default messages;
```

## View component

> In this case, as we are using variations, the view component needs to use the variation template to render the contents of the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For variations, the view component needs to use the variation template to render the contents of the block.
```

> This is easily achieved using the `variation` coming on the `props` of the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can do so using the `variation` from the `props` of the block.
```

> Create a file {file}`View.jsx` in the {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a file {file}`View.jsx` in the {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder with the following contents.
```

```jsx
import withBlockExtensions from '@plone/volto/helpers/Extensions/withBlockExtensions';
import cx from 'classnames';
import React from 'react';

const View = (props) => {

>   // data holds the values entered in the block edit form

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // `data` holds the values entered in the block edit form
```

>   // className holds the CSS class names injected to this block by Volto's `styleClassNameExtenders`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // `className` holds the CSS class names injected into this block by Volto's `styleClassNameExtenders`
```

>   // style holds the CSS properties injected to this block by Volto's `Block Sytle Wrapper`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // `style` holds the CSS properties injected into this block by Volto's `Block Style Wrapper`
```

>   // variation holds the variation selected in the block editor, and it is an object as defined in the block configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // `variation` holds the variation selected in the block editor, and it is an object as defined in the block configuration
```

  const { data, className, style, variation } = props;

  const BodyTemplate = variation?.template;

  return (
    <div
      className={cx(
        'block',
        'block06',
        `block06-variation-${variation?.id}`,
        className,
      )}
      style={style}
    >
      <BodyTemplate data={data} />
    </div>
  );
};

// the `withBlockExtensions` HOC, makes the variation selector available in the block edit form
// and provides the `variation` property in the props.
export default withBlockExtensions(View);
```

## Schema enhancer

> We need to configure the schema enhancer function. In this case we will be adding a new field named `color` when using the Variation 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next you need to configure the schema enhancer function.
In this example, you will add a new field named `color` when using `schemaEnhancerVariation02`.
```

> Create a file {file}`enhancers.js` in the {file}`BlockSchema` folder with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a file {file}`enhancers.js` in the {file}`BlockSchema` folder with the following content.
```

```js
const schemaEnhancerVariation02 = ({ formData, schema, intl }) => {
  // schema holds the original schema (see the Schema.js file)

>   // so we need to define the new property under `schema.properties`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // so you need to define the new property under `schema.properties`
```

>   // and push its name to the relevant fieldset, in our case the first one (note the `fieldsets[0]`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // and push its name to the relevant fieldset, in this case the first one (note the `fieldsets[0]`)
```

  schema.properties.color = {
    title: 'Color',
  };
  schema.fieldsets[0].fields.push('color');
  return schema;
};

export default schemaEnhancerVariation02;

```

## Variations

> Now we need to create one or more variations that will be available for this block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next create one or more variations that will be available for this block.
```

> Create a file {file}`VariationView01.jsx` in the {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a file {file}`VariationView01.jsx` in the {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder with the following contents.
```

```jsx
import React from 'react';

const View = (props) => {
  const { data } = props;
  return (
    <>
      <h2>Variation View 01</h2>
      <div>
        <ul>
          <li>Title: {data.title}</li>
          <li>URL: {data.url}</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </>
  );
};

export default View;
```

> Create a file {file}`VariationView02.jsx` in the {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Create a file {file}`VariationView02.jsx` in the {file}`ExampleBlock06` folder with the following contents.
```

```jsx
import React from 'react';

const View = (props) => {
  const { data } = props;
  return (
    <>
      <h2>Variation View 02</h2>
      <div>
        <ul>
          <li>Title: {data.title}</li>
          <li>URL: {data.url}</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </>
  );
};

export default View;
```

> As you can see, in this case the variations are pretty much the same, the only difference is the text that is rendered in the `<h2>` tag. But it can be anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, the variations are pretty much the same.
The only difference is the text that is rendered in the `<h2>` tag.
But it can be anything.
```

## Block configuration

With all the block components ready, you need to register the block into Volto.

> To do so, open your addon's {file}`index.js` file, that will have the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, open your add-on's {file}`index.js` file, and add the following contents.
```

```js
const applyConfig = (config) => {
  config.settings.isMultilingual = false;
  config.settings.supportedLanguages = ['en'];
  config.settings.defaultLanguage = 'en';

  return config;
}

export default applyConfig;
```

> And before the last `return config;` statement, write the following configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before the last `return config;` statement, write the following configuration.
```

  config.blocks.blocksConfig.block06 = {
    id: 'block06', // this is the block id, it must match the id on the previous line
    title: 'Block 06', // this is the block title
    view: View06, // this is the block's view component
    //edit: Edit05,
    blockSchema: Schema06, // this is the schema that will be used to render the edit form
    icon: imagesSVG, // this is the image that will be shown in the block selector
    sidebarTab: 1, // this is set to 1 to have the `Block` tab selected in the sidebar editor when editing this block
    // these are the variations available for this block
    variations: [
      {
        id: 'variation01', // this is the id of the variation
        title: 'Variation 01', // this is the title of the variation
        isDefault: true, // this signals if this is the default variation for this block
        template: VariationView0601, // this is the component that will render the variation
      },
      {
        id: 'variation02',
        title: 'Variation 02',
        isDefault: false,
        template: VariationView0602,
        schemaEnhancer: schemaEnhancerBlock06Variation02, // this is the schema enhancer definition
      },
    ],
  };

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> On the top of the file you will need to import the relevant components, as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the top of the file, import the relevant components as follows.
```

```js
import View06 from './components/ExampleBlock06/View';
import Schema06 from './components/ExampleBlock06/Schema';
import VariationView0601 from './components/ExampleBlock06/VariationView01';
import VariationView0602 from './components/ExampleBlock06/VariationView02';
import schemaEnhancerBlock06Variation02 from './components/ExampleBlock06/enhancers';

// This is the icon we use for the example, use a meaningful one or provide your own image.
import imagesSVG from '@plone/volto/icons/images.svg';
```

## See it in action

Your block is ready to be used in your site.

> Restart your Volto site and you will be able to add it using the block add form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restart your Volto site, and you can add it using the block add form.
```
